The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is an interview with author James P. Hogan.
James P. Hogan is one of the very finest of the Young Science Fiction writers that began
publishing in the 1970s. He has a strong background in electronics and digital systems,
and a broad knowledge of science that is evident in all his work. Some have called him the man who
put science back in science fiction. Hogan's forte is to set a novel in the near future,
to create a bright, scientifically oriented young man as the hero, and then to examine some
theme characteristic of science fiction. He'd inherit the stars and the gentle giants of
Gainamede, for instance. He treats first contact with an alien species. In two faces of tomorrow,
he deals with artificial intelligence. And in Thrice, upon a time, he has written an
astoundingly realistic time travel novel. Hogan's stories are not only exciting narratives,
but also stimulating and thoughtful extrapolations on man's future.
How did you get interested in writing?
And when I left school, I told the world I was going to be a writer. And you could think
it's a good idea until somebody said, well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience of 16
years, what are you going to write about, but the world is breathlessly waiting to hear?
And I hadn't thought about that. And the answer was not a lot. So I went away into engineering
and electronics and computers and things like that for something like 20 years. And I suppose the
interest in writing probably never went away. And 20 odd years later, that situation had changed
a lot. I spent a lot of that time. I started off as an electronics engineer and then a computer
designer and then went into selling computer systems. And not the blue boxes you see at work
that print out payrolls and things. I'm not talking about business computers, but the real-time
scientific systems that might go into scientific research laboratories are connected up to
instruments to collect all the data and turn them into pictures on screens and
sort of computers you'd find in particle accelerator installations or observatories. In
other words, all my customers were scientists, physicists, biologists, chemists and so forth.
And the kind of system we're talking about ranged up several million dollars. And when somebody's
buying a system of that size, it's not the kind of thing that you sell in a one-half hour
sales call and say sign the paper. You're frequently working with them for 12 maybe 18 months
before a contract is finalized. And during that time, you have to try and understand a lot of
what they're doing in terms of to be able to put together and recommend the right sort of system
for their needs. In other words, you get to know a little bit of what they're all doing.
And I found it fascinating, a fascinating world that they lived in.
Associating with the scientists, as you were, I guess that gave you a lot of the background
material that you use in your stories. Yeah. Well, that provided more to trigger. I
the stimulation to take an interest in that kind of work. I guess reading provided a lot of it.
But that kind of material is easy to read when you have a vested interest in understanding it,
because you have business relationships that will profit from that understanding. In other words,
it's reading with a purpose, a clear-cut purpose rather than just out of curiosity or
a way of killing time. But luckily, it became a little more than that.
Most of your stories, I guess, would be called hard science fiction.
Do you do a lot of research whenever you do write a story?
Yeah, I do. I read quite a lot. And I suppose the bulk of my reading is nonfiction. So
even casual reading in a way becomes what might be termed non-specific research. In other words,
information that just gets stored away and comes out later, although I didn't
study it for any particular reason at the time.
But while I was, before I became a full-time writer, I was still working in the computer
business. I used to, I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants,
which was kind of handy. I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other
customers who were studied pieces of rock brought back from the Apollo missions and
other guys who were building in or investigating machine intelligence. And just about any of the
topics or the favorite themes of science fiction that you could take out of a hat,
the chances were sort of not 10 to 1. I had a customer specializing in that field. And I just
had to, if I needed some background information on a particular topic, I could almost guarantee
I had a phone number in my diary as a guy who could talk all day about it. And they loved
doing it as well. I used to call them and they'd like to come and talk to you tomorrow.
Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about? Oh, I need some help with the book I'm working on.
Well, why didn't you say so? What times do you want to show up and they talk all day?
I think this is one of the
interesting sides of selling computers into this kind of area. You can imagine some of these
specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever and they end up shutting the back rooms
of universities. And maybe there are four people on the planet they can talk to who understand
their language. And sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the world outside
that has walked in off the street is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to them and
is curious, he wants to know what they're doing, wants to have it explained. And it was a very
pleasant way to work a living. You're not only
gain customers, in many instances I found you gain friends as well.
Your first novel, in fact, I believe it was the first thing that you wrote was In Hair of the
Stars, wasn't it? It's a science fiction detective story. How did you come to write that book?
Well, I think that sums it up pretty well. It reflects I think the way I see science, which is
indeed as a wonderful ongoing never-ending detective story. And I suppose I got a little bit
dissatisfied with some of the depictions of science and scientists that I'd seen in fiction.
I formed the impression or the suspicion in some cases that perhaps
the people who had written some of the fiction certainly would perhaps not work
in a scientific field or spoken to a scientist for a long, long time and maybe generations of
people had reinforced each other's cliches. And scientists were always eccentric and they wore
color shoes and they drew cabbages of eight people and they wanted to conquer the world or something.
And there are these cute public impressions of scientists as people who run down the street
with no clothes on shouting Eureka. You read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on
and what came to him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20 years.
And real science, you know, there are insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming
bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes, a lot of people doing nothing really
dramatic or exciting, but just meticulously sifting through details and collecting information
for generations and for centuries, all different parts of the world. And it's really like putting
together a huge jigsaw puzzle, lots of people cutting out pieces and twisting them around and
every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner and see that it fits with a
huge chunk down there and that's a breakthrough. And so it goes on. And it really is a detective story.
I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective fiction. And I wanted to write a story
that attempted to depict it in this kind of way and hopefully would convey some of the excitement
that personally I feel when I look at this whole thing. I thought that yeah, let's make it a detective
story, but if we want a detective mystery that is going to be sufficiently intriguing to motivate
a large proportion of the scientific community as happened in Inherit the Stars, we want something
a little more original and exciting than bodies in the library or footprints in the flower bed.
So we invented Charlie and the aliens and the rest I suppose you know.
Basically it was an attempt to depict science as it is or at least as I perceive it. And at the
time people who were non-scientists, non-specialists would find stimulating and
arousing for the curiosity even if without trying to turn it into a 250 page
lab report or something like that. Yeah, I believe I don't know if I'm reading this into your work
or not, but your writing is sort of almost a celebration of learning, you know, the learning
process. Yes, I think it's one of the most exciting processes anybody can experience.
I think it's very sad that in large sections of our culture we should have evolved the
attitude that learning is something you endure until you leave school and then,
you know, it ceases with adulthood. I think education and living are just
different aspects of the same process that never ends.
In the minds of a lot of people the two seem to have separated out and for some reason
learning is looked upon as hard work and unpleasant and something that you
you steer clear of unless you can't avoid it. I think that's very, very sad.
No reason why it should be so, I think it's just a consequence of cultural expectation. A lot of
people expect it to be hard work and tedious and sure enough it is. In your stories I've noticed
that you really flesh out the futures that you create with a lot of detail. What does that,
that's simply to just make the story more realistic. I was remembering one particular
instance when a hunt is traveling from England to the United States and he opens up his briefcase
and plugs in his video phone to the to the plane and makes this long-distance call right there.
It seems so natural that it just creates a very realistic atmosphere for your story.
Yeah I like to do things like that. I think these kinds of details do matter because
if we are if we're putting a story into a futuristic setting I think the
these little details of background such as if the guy needs to make a phone call how does he go
about it if he needs to render CAD these matter because if the story is being told in the future
the whole back the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic.
I've come across a number of instances which are in my opinion a little flawed because
a writer may have seized on a particular thought maybe a new scientific idea or a machine or
whatever. Develops that very well but kind of gets hung up on it and in the background everything
else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980 and trying to I think just stop typing for the
five minutes it takes just to think about a situation the guy's going to make a phone call
just like stop and think how he might make that and think about it for five minutes and then maybe
show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in the first
couple of seconds. It's worth the effort I don't think it radically changes the story but it does
give it that finishing polish as it were at least in that sense and I try to do this in
all the stories and I find the readers like it I think I from the people who who write to me and
the people that I meet one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that
very it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader who buys
anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstores but a lot of I suppose
people who might be termed younger professional people in their late 20s 30s 40s in all manner of
professions not necessarily to do with the scientists teachers lawyers doctors so forth
who typically would say gee I you know I haven't I used to read science fiction when I was at
college or when I was at university but I kind of grew out of it you know I can't relate to
way out galaxies like years away anymore or aliens running around with ray guns today I have a family
of career of mortgage my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet but they seem to like stories
that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now but
maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years and they find names in the book like IBM and Avis and
Boeing familiar places and it kind of grabs them they say well you know this I can relate to it's
the world that I live in just stretched a little bit the connection is not broken the economics and
the politics have evolved from what I read in the papers I can still see the connections
and it could be the world my kids go up it and I like it and if it has that effect on that
you know far off the market of readership then I'm perfectly happy to continue doing that
in addition to the reason that I I enjoy the stories better myself for doing that
I wouldn't be misreading uh in saying you're an optimistic person would I
I think I am and notice your stories uh tend to be rather optimistic sure why not
I think there's enough doom and gloom around I I try and contribute something to counter balance
all that I think it's needed you probably uh would hold a great hope for the human potential then
oh I think it's unlimited it doesn't guarantee we'll uh use it correctly and wisely at all
there's no guarantee of that but I I have no doubt that the potential exists
and the choice is entirely up to us and I think that in itself is grounds for optimism it means
that we're not pawns at the you know that are pushed around by fate or magical mystical forces
that we have no control over our future I think that would be a very depressing thought
uh I think it underlies a lot of the philosophies that we hear astounded
all right you know an excuse to to quit trying to to to uh write everything off as a futile
I don't subscribe to this at all I think that uh in the same way that the individual futilize
in his or her hands and I think they have infinite potential to build upon this give if they have
I think the only resource that we're short of in some quarters is there is positive thinking
and the right attitude of mine uh nothing else and I think collectively the same is true
I think that uh there is a human tendency to be too conscious of our failings and our faults
and our mistakes uh which have happened it would be silly to deny that um but I think by and large
we've achieved some some remarkable and wonderful things as well and can continue to do so and I
think when I look at the bottom line of the balance sheet I'm pretty proud to be a member of the human race
in your novel thrice upon a time you base the story around a device that can send messages back in
time to itself 24 hours in the past and then by that process just keep sending it back to itself
and back to itself uh I've been reading recently about a several scientists who are speculating
about real possibilities of time travel yeah it was your novel uh that your novel really was written
before those came out it's sort of prophetic in a way maybe that's where they got it from
well I don't know whether it's prophetic or not I I said well as it's elaborated in the book
itself uh if something like that ever became a fact there are some pretty interesting problems
they're going to have to be solved and our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have to
undergo some pretty interesting revisions so I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet
saying yes it'll happen um maybe I don't know I think history has shown that uh impossible or it'll
never happen a very dangerous phrase is to use in any context uh as far as I was concerned it was just
uh a fun basis for a story certainly not an original one although I did I was trying I don't
suppose any of the things I've written about have been original in in in essence I try and
approach them from hopefully fresh and different angles but for some time for a number of years in
fact before I wrote thrice upon a time I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a number
of reasons uh firstly I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes the logical paradoxes
once and for all and answer them without top outs without convenient coincidences
and without obliging characters who just happen to do the right thing to make everything come out
the way the author said uh and secondly I wanted to I I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche
of some kind of a conjurer's box described or described as whatever that you jump into and
you jump out of and you're in some other time uh we seem too many conjurer's boxes and it seemed
to me unrealistic if if I ever build a box like that and I thought it was going to take me to another
time I certainly would jump into it and press the button I would conduct a long series of tests
and experiments first and none of our heroes ever seem to do this and it seemed to me reasonable
to say if we're going to make the speculation of influencing the past
it seems to me to me to be reasonable to speculate that if we're going to make that assumption anyway
but before we move structured objects and people back into another time it we probably
learn how to inject energy first uh and if you can send energy back in time you can obviously
switch the energy on and off and modulate it and send information in other words you can
send messages to yourself if you like I wanted to I didn't want it to be a million years or a
uh in some huge span of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference how about
a lab bench experiment 10 minutes now you can you can just send a little signal back to yourself
10 minutes ago and change what you've already done this is interesting you know you're hard up against
the paradoxes now you can't um duck around find a way around them or duck them you've got to answer
the question what happened um the logic goes a bit the whole situation becomes absolutely uh
it drives you to the point of insanity trying to figure it out I found the only way to do it was
to think in terms of the simplest possible uh lab bench experiment that you could devise and strip
away all the complications to just get the logic right and then elaborate it back in up to the
level that would make a story interesting and the simplest situation that you can think of is a
button on a lamp and when you push the button the lamp comes on it couldn't get much simpler than that
the only uh different thing here is the lamp comes on 10 seconds before you press the button
because the signal goes back in time so the question is obvious what happened I wait
till the lamp comes on 10 seconds later it's time to press the button I'm not going to press it
nobody could make me I didn't want mystical force is compelling people to do something they didn't
want to do uh wanted to preserve human free will so what happened I don't press the button
conversely I can say well I I the lamp didn't come on but I'm going to press the button anyway just
for hell of it what happened uh so those are two situations one being the inverse of the other and
if you can explain what happens you can answer any time travel paradox because every every one is
an elaboration of one of those situations or the other and it's not good enough to for example to
wait for the lamp to come on and you say not going to press the button and you fold your arms and sit
there and just as the the time is up the door opens and somebody strolls in and says hey what's this
impressive about you know that doesn't get you out of it because you're a scientist you're going to
repeat your experiment under conditions where that couldn't happen you lock the door
and set it up again you go out of the room and have the computer press the button but eventually
you would test it time and time and time again and this uh if accidents happen that that got you out
of a mess for the first time you could eliminate them the next time and eventually you have to face
up to that question what happens that's what I wanted and the first thing I wanted to do was to
tell a story in which the time machine itself and the staggering conceptual changes in physics and
philosophy that are implied are relevant to the story that's being told there an integral part of
it if you talk them away there wouldn't be any story uh I think in too many stories uh time
machines are used like starships they're just a device a vehicle to get some characters into
an unusual environment and then tell a pretty routine story that would stole them from Greek
mythology or european medieval history and the technology doesn't come into the story at all
they could have gone on a greyhound bus uh I didn't want to do that and so the story was about
some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon uh and had realized that if what they
were seeing meant what they thought it meant it meant that they could actually
inject information into the past and change the past with all the questions that implies
uh and being proceeded to test this phenomenon and and it contains some very very strange results
and yet they're convinced that you know behind all this there is some consistent system of
super logic that does make sense and they're trying to figure out the rules of it uh
and uh of course there's an unspoken or unwritten invitation for the reader to participate
again I suppose it's a kind of a detective story uh not so much a who's done it but how is it done
to see if the reader can figure out the rules before the characters do
James Hogan's stories have explored several science fiction themes using extrapolations
of today's technology at times he paints a picture of the future so real you can almost
touch it this type of hands-on hardware science fiction was very popular in the 50s and 60s and
Hogan is helping to bring it back the inherit the star's trilogy is not to be missed by anyone
who is interested in science fiction mysteries are the fascination of new technologies the third
part of the trilogy is entitled giant star and will be released in june
this is david cruise daryl lane and david carcen this has been the science fiction radio show
a presentation of the permean basin science fiction association in conjunction with kocv fm
and odessa college odessa texas